---
layout: post
title:  "Institutionalized"
date:   2022-03-18 19:15:59 -0600
categories: [wellness]
excerpt: "When I was 17, I was committed to St. Louis University Hospital for 72 hours.  I'm retelling my struggle to own it.  It is part of me but it doesn't define who I am.  I think moments of struggle are also invitations to grow; and sometimes growth takes a long time.  As I'm writing this - I'm tempted to compare my struggle with those of others; there's a part of me that doesn't feel like I deserve to tell this story.  However as a good friend reminded me, comparison is the thief of happiness; struggle is struggle and grief is grief.  It's personal and isn't minimized because other grief or struggle exists."
---
My cheeks were flushed.  I was embarrassed; the people in my dorm were laughing at me.  They all were laughing at me.  As I caught a breadth, I realized that was ridiculous and then I got mad.  Shortly after I started college, I agreed with a psychiatrist to start on a selective Serotonin re-uptake inhibitor.  I thought it was supposed to keep me from feeling this way.

I've struggled with depression my entire life; early in that struggle I also carried shame associated with being on medication.  I rationalized that medication was provided to people to fix an acute brokenness.  It was an aid for the body to get better.  In this case, my brokenness was the way I think.  The aid was supposed to prevent me from thinking irrational thoughts; it was supposed to keep me happy or at the least dull the familiar ache of pain.  It turns out that's not the way medication works.  Serotonin re-uptake inhibitors make it easier for the active transport of Serotonin through cells.  They mitigate a biological trait that prevents normal transport of Serotonin.  It doesn't work like other mind altering drugs that simulate pleasure chemicals.  As a result, being on anti-depressant doesn't eliminate pain or embarrassment; it just helps me keep perspective.  

In the moment, in my anguish and my desire to end how I was feeling; I took the entire bottle.  It started as a test to see how many pills would it take to dull the pain.  When it didn't improve after taking another hit, it just seemed natural to double down.

My roommate got assistance from the floor supervisor who called the police.  Two EMT's entered our dorm room, put me on a stretcher, and wheeled me to an ambulance.  I remember looking at the faces of the people who were around me - I remember seeing a look of concern; a look of pity coming from those watching the scene that I had unintentionally caused.  I felt pitiful; I felt worthless.

The next thing I remember, I was in the emergency room at St. Louis University Hospital.  The doctor fed me chalk to dilute anything I may have taken.  Their biggest concern was that in my state; I wasn't a reliable witness.  They were afraid that I had taken something else in addition to the bottle of anti-depressants.  They expected that I had taken something else.  I chuckled to myself, I wasn't even good enough to correctly attempt suicide.  

I woke up on the psychiatric floor.  I asked to get discharged and I was told that I was going to be in observation for at least 72 hours.  I remember feeling trapped.  The hospital floor was clean like all hospital floors but it was warmer; the walls were beige - the air didn't smell like antiseptic.  It wasn't the scene that One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest had prepared me for.  Like other hospital floors, there was a nursing station and a shared room where instead of visitors; patients mingled with each other.  It felt like no-one visited the psychiatric floor; after all who would.  I don't remember much about my time on the floor.  I didn't feel like I had a lot in common with my fellow patients.  

I remember talking to a psychologist who evaluated me.  The conversations were short; he was trying to figure out if I knew where I was, what had happened, and what would happen next.  I tried to talk about how medication made me feel uncomfortable.  I quickly learned if I struggled against medication, I wasn't going to get released.  I finally answered his questions the way I thought he wanted me to - I was rewarded with a nod and discharge orders.  The day after I was released, I picked up the medication I was prescribed.  As I left the hospital medication in hand, I walked to the nearest public trash can and threw it away.

Since this moment in my life, I've learned a lot.  I ended up making peace with medication nearly 10 years later.  I think moments of struggle are also invitations to grow; and sometimes growth takes a long time.  As I'm writing this - I'm tempted to compare my struggle with those of others; there's a part of me that doesn't feel like I deserve to tell this story.  However as a good friend reminded me, comparison is the thief of happiness; struggle is struggle and grief is grief.  It's personal and isn't minimized because other grief or struggle exists.  I'm retelling my struggle to own it.  It is part of me but it doesn't define who I am.  