---
layout: post
title:  "Other"
date:   2022-03-29 19:15:59 -0600
categories: [wellness]
excerpt: "I've struggled with belonging since I was young.  The desire to belong has driven me for so long that I think it's a major part of my identify.  In this blog post, I talk about that desire nad how it's affected who I am right now.  I suspect, if I'm honest with myself, the desire to belong is underneath the anger and self-deprecation that exacerbates my depression."
---
The first time I felt like an other was when I was in second grade.  The kids in my public school were having a hard time pronouncing Avinash so they took to a nickname - Carwash.  Around the same time, I had a south asian friend who nicknamed me Avi.  I felt like I had a choice; I could become Carwash or I could become Avi.  After watching the Simpsons, I resolved to do whatever it took to be distant from the Kwik-E-Mart, Gas Stations, and Carwashes.  And so Avi was born.

Being the other was also reinforced by an early childhood trip to India.  During music class at school; we were taught a refrain to sing back after kids sang "Happy Birthday".  In that trip, my family celebrated my birthday.  I sang the refrain as I was taught.  The reaction I got let me know what I had done wasn't a norm in my family.  The lesson I learned was that I was too Indian to be American and too American to be Indian.  

In hindsight, I don't think that was the appropriate lesson; I'm friends with many of my first cousins and I'm grateful for my global family.  I think the challenge I had and still have is this pursuit to feel like I belong.  For my kids - I've tried to get ahead of this by helping them build relationships with extended family, by talking to them about race, and by leaning on other structures that can reinforce belonging like religion.  I want them to feel like they are 100% Indian and 100% American.  I want them to have a sense that they belong to this world, this family, and they can leverage their history to help them become who they want to be.

Having a small friend circle of South Asians growing up, I eventually developed an identity as a minority.  Not having an accent or speaking Malayalam made it difficult to find commonalities with kids at the temple.  What's worse, as a minority trying to assimilate - I judged the kids that I viewed as Indian.  At least I wasn't Apu.  

My minority identity was eventually challenged when, at 16, I was in downtown St. Louis.   I tried to act as an ally to a black man.  While I don't remember the exact situation; I do remember that the man quickly pointed out to me that I wasn't black.  That realization was reinforced as I started to become aware of the privilege I had grown up in; I felt like while I was an other I didn't carry the burden required to be a minority.

One of the things I love about my wife is that I always felt that she saw me as a person.  In fact, she didn't realize she was in a mixed race relationship until we were driving in a wealthy neighborhood in St. Louis and I was pulled over by a police officer.  The officer asked my wife if she was ok before letting us go.  That year I was pulled over and released over five times.  In hindsight, I think it likely had to do with a problem with my license registration.  All the same, none of the officers provided me with an explanation of why I was being pulled over.  Without that information, what I learned was that while I wasn't a minority, I definitely wasn't the majority either.

As the relationship with my wife deepened, we decided to get married.  Our engagement was difficult.  Neither of us were financially secure.  My parents frowned on the marriage because they felt like we were doing ourselves an injustice in trying to build a house on a shaky foundation.  When my dad told me he wasn't going to attend the wedding, I was devastated.  I told him that we would get beyond any short term decision but that some decisions you couldn't take back.  I want to be clear that I love my parents and I think they were trying to protect our new family.  We didn't need protection; we needed support.  In part because of my dad's decision, none of my extended family attended the wedding either.

Sometimes I wonder if Avinash still exists or if all that's left is Avi.  I get angry at my younger self for making such an important decision about identity out of a desire for acceptance that feels like it will never be realized.  I wonder if Avinash would have had more family at his wedding.  At the same token, I don't think that's the right question for me to ask.  I can't control the past.  I feel like I should ask if I am growing to be the person I want to be. 

Facebook reminded me that I once wondered if a person is more than the sum of their past experiences.  In addition to the past, I think determining where you want to go is important.  I am confident that I'm trying to make the best of my talents to realize God's commandment that we love each other.  If Avi can get me to where I want to go, do I still need Avinash?

Recently in my professional career, I had a few South Asian friends clue me in on an acronym ABCD - American Born Confused Desi.  For the record, I was born in India and had to go through the naturalization process with the help of a lawyer.  All the same, I suppose it should be comforting that there are enough people who share my desire to belong that we have an acronym.  Unfortunately, it just reminds me that I'm outside of communities that I want to be part of.   

When my wife read this post, she said "we are our own other group."  I'm reminded of the Fault of the Stars:
> I think your special is that not enough?  You think the ony way to lead a meaningful life is for everyone to remember you.  For everyone to love you.  Guess what, Gus. This is your life, okay?  This is all you get.  You get me, and you get your family, and you get this world, and that's it.  And if that's not enough for you then I'm sorry but it's not nothing.