---
layout: post
title:  "Red Lines"
date:   2022-03-25 19:15:59 -0600
categories: [wellness]
excerpt: "I crossed a red line in my journey with depression this week.  I'm taking steps to get extra assistance.  At the same token, I'm not simply trying to banish depression from my life as I have in the past.  I don't know what the answers are but I look forward to the next steps I take in establishing this new more complete identity."
---
This week I saw my doctor related to my depression because I crossed a red line.  On Wednesday, as I was waking I thought wouldn't it be easier if I reached the end of my journey.  The self exploration could stop.  The pain associated with shame could stop.  Moreover, I know how to end my journey.  Previous research has taught me how to suicide and I could picture it - sliced wrists or dying while street cycling.  Picturing your suicide is not normal and for me it's a particular red line that indicates my normal coping mechanisms are not working and I need help.  With my doctor, we decided to increase the dosage of my antidepressant medication and in addition I signed up for talkspace to gain access to psychologist to work through this flareup.

Last year while going through Dare to Lead training professionally, I learned that "setting boundaries is making clear what's okay and what's not okay, and why.  Vulnerability minus boundaries is not vulnerability.  It's confession, manipulation, desperation, or shock and awe, but it's not vulnerability" (Dare to Lead).  While boundaries are clearly important in relationships, I think they are equally important in how I manage myself.  So much of life is habit driven inertia; by being clear about the boundaries that I think are acceptable I can get signs about when I need to act; when just trying to push through isn't the right answers.  These are my red lines.

In looking at Cleveland Clinic's symptoms of depression, I now clear three of eight common symptoms:
- Feeling very sad, hopeless or worried
- Not enjoying things that used to give you joy ✔️
- Being easily irritated or frustrated
- Eating too much or too little
- Changes in how much you sleep ✔️
- Having a difficult time concentrating or remembering things
- Experiencing physical problems like headache, stomachache, or sexual dysfunction
- Thinking about hurting or killing yourself ✔️

Whatever this is, it's clear to me that it's not a simple passing sadness.  I'm confident that the steps I'm taking will help me restore balance.  While I'm here, I want to take the opportunity for self-reflection to determine if there is something I'm longing for that has made me welcome this sorrow.

> Why do we sometimes welcome sorrow when the rest of the time we will quite naturally do anything we can to avoid it?  There's actually a scholarly 
> debate raging over this question, but I have come to believe that really, what we are craving, at bottom, is that state of longing, that joy that's 
> laced with sorrow. Which is often triggered when we experience something so exquisite that it seems to come to us from some other world (The hidden 
> power of sad songs and rainy days)

While I have some theories, I don't find any completely satisfactory:
- I want to be able to forgive myself.  There's some truth to this.  I am harder on myself then anyone else would even dream to be.  I also carry some secrets that I'm not proud of.  I blame myself for things that are outside of my control.  At the same token, I'm proud of my life.  I'm proud of the impact I have on my family, colleagues, and the world at large.  While I see the world as imperfect, I also think I'm working with others to make it better.
- I want to unify myself.  In many ways, I've reacted to living with depression by compartmentalizing it.  I've kept my life in neat boxes and I don't give room often to the angst-y child who wanted above all other things to be normal.  Banishing that boy has consequences.  It has made it harder for me to empathize with people who are in pain.  As a result, in the face of someone elses suffering I can come off as cold.  Likewise I've surprised as aspects of my life have been claimed by other communities.  For example, when I was doing inclusivity work last year I was surprised that the community I was working with acknowledged my history with depression as living with a disability.  Because I don't allow it to be part of me, I struggle recognizing myself as part of a community.  I'm denying myself connection.

This to me is core to the meaning of life: To decide who you are, who you want to be, and what steps you need to take to get there.  I don't know the answers but I'm confident that the journey taking is a better reaction than trying to simply banish the dark.  I look forward to the next steps I take in establishing this new more complete identity.

