---
layout: post
title:  "Armor"
date:   2022-04-11 19:15:59 -0600
categories: [wellness]
excerpt: "I work through a mental block that I have around empathizing with other's illness.  I talk about how my personality, and my past contribute to that block and I discuss hopes I have for changing my behavior in the future."
---
I've started counseling to explore the bittersweet of my soul that surfaces in depression.  It's my hope through reflection that I'm able to make space with sadness; to make depression less of a thing that I keep locked away until it breaks it's cage and more of an aspect of personality that I live with and manage.  To that end, I gave my counselor three goals that I wanted to work on:
- I want to explore the armor I put around health issues because I think it can prevent me from empathizing with people in pain.
- I want to reflect on my need to belong and the boundaries I've established in creating my tribe, my family, my work, and my spirituality.  While I think I'm mainly balanced, I think it's helpful to have check-up because unhealthy behavior is amazingly easy to rationalize away.
- I want to explore the shame I carry for things that I've done in my past.  I want to understand the source, any feeding behaviors I may have, and the impact that carrying weight may have on decision making.

At the end of the first counseling session, I agreed to reflect more on the issues I have with health issues; I agreed to identify underlying causes and consider what if anything I would be willing to change in my behavior.  So while this post is primarily targeted at that discovery, I think it'll be useful if I setup some context about me before we dive in together.

# background
My core values are heart and integrity.  For me living with a whole heart means that I give everything I have and more to situations that I find myself in.  Integrity balances my leave-it-on-the-field drive by encouraging self-awareness, candor, and a growth-mindset.

I'm a doer.  If you were to drop me in the middle of the wilderness, I would start walking in a uniform direction because the probability that I'd find a road is high.  I'd try to learn about my surroundings to determine what I would need to do make it back to civilization and start executing on that plan.  In addition to ambiguous situations, I'll work through almost anything that's difficult; when the going get's tough, I get going.  For example, after my wife and I got married, I insisted that we do Sunday night dinners with my parents.  After my dad decided not to attend our wedding, I knew that those dinners would be difficult and there would be many years ahead of repairing the relationship between the family I was creating and my parents.  Nevertheless, I was determined to do my part by showing up.  Having lived with unmedicated depression for nearly thirty years; I think I became a doer because if I stayed still when I was in trouble, I would have drowned.  

I rely on feedback systems to ensure that my effort is well-invested and my effort results in outcomes I associate with living a good life.  Every month I track my weight, sleep, activity, church attendance, dates and other kpi's.  When I don't feel satisfied, I try to reflect on proximate causes and things I can do to improve.  I talk to my tribe about difficulty I'm going through.  I read voraciously to learn about new ideas.  As a result, I don't just do; I get better.  I continually try to become the person I want to be.

Fpr most of my life, I couldn't imagine that people would deal with adversity in other ways.  When Yammer got acquired by Microsoft, my doer drive was in full swing.  I quickly learned the territory I was going to be responsible for, determined an initial travel schedule, and made contact with teams that I'd support.  In contrast, several of my peers waited for clarification about the role and suggested initiatives before engaging.  Trying to understand the difference, I talked to a mentor who reminded me that sometimes people respond to uncertainty by searching for more information.  We talked about the reasons why that's an appropriate response: with more information you gain confidence in your direction, with more information you can coordinate your actions with others, and with more information you can leverage the sponsorship of others to move faster.  While the approach was foreign, it was a revelation because I could empathize with it.

Later in my career I'd partner with a client executive who would push this concept with me further.  He pointed out that activity doesn't always generate results; in fact, results correlated when clients could articulate the value of the activity.  He showed me that timing mattered and that sometimes it was best to move at the same speed as the client you were working with.

I'm a doer but I also recognize that it's important to move at the speed of those that I'm working with.  Now, I am being challenged to apply this professional lesson to my personal life in order to better empathize with people who are in pain.  It's probably not a surprise that I deal with pain by "shaking it off".  I tend to respond to others in pain with the same type of guidance.  Unfortunately, that's one of least effective ways to respond to pain.

# responding to pain

> The human soul doesn't want to be advised or fixed or saved.  It simply wants to be witnessed, exactly as it is.  Parker Palmer

In a video, Megan Devine explains how acknowledgement is the best way to help those suffering; to sit with others who are in pain and not try to fix it.  People are resilient, they'll find their own path forward.  Acknowledging where they are helps them feel validated and supported.  For me the line between acknowledgement and acceptance is blurry.

In my youth, my dad didn't draw lines between punishment, anger, and love.  As a result, I felt that love was conditional.  That was reinforced by what I saw with my parents relationship.  While they never actually divorced, they came close several times.  Most often the fights were about money and I internalized them as: I will love you if you can reduce your wasteful spending.  One time it got so bad, I actually helped my mom put a down-payment on an apartment.  After each argument, my parents reconciled in private which appeared to me as acceptance of the status quo.

My mom was born with CMT4; she didn't start walking until she was five.  She's on several heart medications to manage a weak heart beat.  She has a bulging eye that's impacted her vision.  While my parents' arguments were about money, I always felt like health wasn't far away.  The spending my dad would complain about included spending on medication and massages to manage pain.  I learned that love could be contingent on a persons ability to deal with pain.

In my first committed relationship, I dated a person who lived with Crohn's disease.  She was in severe pain and struggled.  Over the course of two years, she had her intestines re-sectioned four times ultimately culminating colectomy.  It was painful watching someone I care about, someone who had dreams, lose herself to the pain associated with disease.  I stayed in that relationship too long, in the end sacrificing my undergraduate experience.  As it became clear that she was becoming ill, I tried to accelerate my study so that I could take on the role of the bread-winner.  I ended graduating before I was 20 and ran up an impressive amount of debt trying to make the failed relationship work.  As I saw her fail, I tried to setup a series of positive incentives to encourage her to figure out how to manage her disease.  I even agreed to get married if we could make our lives financially sustainable.  I was trying to setup conditions for my love that could manipulate how my then fiance managed pain.  I wanted her to take control of her life on my timetable; in exchange I would love her.  

When that relationship ended, I was sad because I felt like I had failed; but I was confident that the relationship had on a whole made me a worse person.  I had learned how to survive and had some great memories but I wasn't progressing towards a good life.  I determined that I had tried to take responsibility for another person's choices and thus had setup a relationship based on a house of cards.  In the future, I vowed to only enter relationships on mutual respect; as a partnership of equals.

# shutting down
During my engagement with Missy, she had multiple minor surgeries for what was diagnosed as a Bartholin cyst.  While she was going through that, I couldn't help but see a similarity to my previous experience with Crohn's.  I distinctly remember at one point talking to Missy's brother after she had been admitted to the hospital; I told him I wasn't sure if I go through another relationship affected by Crohn's.  

Ultimately, I determined then, as now, that Missy's support makes me a better person.  She encourages me to do difficult things and she has faith that together we can tackle any challenge.  Her steadiness helps anchor me and provides a base for me to relate with others.  She makes me better; I wasn't going to give that up for Crohn's.  At the same token, I was committed to not make the same mistakes that I made in my previous relationship.  Through couple's counseling I learned how to voice disagreements, define boundaries, and practice unconditional love.  I learned that I could love and support Missy without taking ownership of her problems.  

One boundary I quickly established was around health.  I'd support her and be present when she needed to have a procedure; but I wouldn't sacrifice my future.  She accepted the limits of support I could provide and she developed her own support network of family and friends that would help her through medical crisis.  In fact, shortly after I got a job offer from Microsoft, Missy was formally diagnosed with Crohn's and required a major surgery.  As timing would have it, I moved to Minnesota weeks before her surgery.  Through the support of her parents, she got through the surgery and recovered and was able to join me three months later.  In order to protect myself, I would love and support her but I wouldn't sacrifice experiences for her health.  

As our marriage continued, the boundary worked for us in a large part because her parents are incredibly supportive and could fill this gap that I couldn't.  Over time, Missy pointed out boundary creep - not only did I not sacrifice but I also was cold to her when she complained about pain.  I would tell her that she needed to figure it out and manage her health.  Eventually she did, becoming an amazing example of what a self-advocating patient looks like.  At the same time, it turned out that the boundary I established around health applied not just to Missy but everyone in my life including our children.  I'm definitely not the parent that will bring you soup in bed when you are sick.  I find that I have some distance with those that I love because I don't empathize with their suffering.

# going forward
I want to close that distance.  I want to support those that I care about.  "The real barrier  . . . is our armor - the thoughts, emotions and behaviors that we use to protect ourselves when we aren't willing and able to rumble with vulnerability," Brene Brown says in Daring Leadership.  She continues, "When we stop caring about what anyone thinks, we're too armored for authentic connection."

Dr. Brown also provides an approach for moving forward:
>Rather than protecting and hiding our heart behind bulletproof glass, wholeheartedness is about integration, It's integrating our thinking, feeling, and behavior.  It's putting down the armor and bringing forth all of the scraggly, misshapen pieces of our history and folding in all of the different roles that, when falsely separated, keep us feeling exhausted and torn, to make a complex, messy, awesome whole person.

For me this blog, is an attempt to integrate the compartments of myself.  I'm trying to undergo sense-making of the things I'm passionate about to better understand who I am and inform how I want to live in the future.  In her book, Dr. Brown provides sixteen examples of armor and provides some suggestions on how to put down armor.  Several things flag up: 
 - Numbing - the act of leveraging an activity or an addiction to take the edge off pain.
    * Counter: Sent boundaries and Finding Real Comfort - Broadly defining boundaries is making clear what's okay and what's not okay, and why.
 - Hiding Behind Cynicism - expressing frustration through passive-aggressiveness and sarcasm.
    * Counter: Modeling Clarity, Kindness, and Hope - Say what you mean and mean what you say.  Have a goal, a path. and confidence that it can be achieved.
 - Using Criticism as Protection - Criticism shifts the spotlight off us and onto someone or something else.
    * Counter: Make Contributions and Take Risks - Come with a point of view and be prepared ot share it.
 - Zigzagging and Avoiding - Zigzagging is a metaphor for trying to dodge the bullets of vulnerability
    * Counter: Talking Straight and Taking Action - Bring clarity and awareness to what we're trying to avoid - then get clear about what needs to be done.

I need to be able to establish clearer boundaries between acknowledgement and acceptance.  One way I can establish the boundaries is by changing how I react; rather than trying to solve a problem I can be better about responding with curiosity:
- It sounds like you are dealing with pain, do you want to talk about it?
- Do you have a plan to make your situation better?
- How can I best support you?

I can also set boundaries around how other peoples processes affect me:
- I understand your suffering right now, but I need a plan.
- I am going to act because I think it will make the situation better.

I'm not sure if this path will lead to success; I do think it's an attempt to be better. 